README.md, before:

# Status
[![Github link](https://assets-cdn.github.com/favicon.ico)](https://github.com/napnap75/rpi-docker-backup)
[![Travis ling](https://cdn.travis-ci.org/images/favicon-076a22660830dc325cc8ed70e7146a59.png)](https://travis-ci.org/napnap75/rpi-docker-backup)
[![Docker hub link](https://www.docker.com/favicon.ico)](https://hub.docker.com/r/napnap75/rpi-docker-backup/)

# Content
This image is based [my own Alpine Linux base image](https://hub.docker.com/r/napnap75/rpi-alpine-base/).

This image contains :
- [Restic](https://restic.github.io/).

This image runs a backup every night (between midnight and 7 AM) on all the containers running on the host. For each container, the script will backup the followin parts (depending of the container labels) :
- The volumes specified by the label `napnap75.backup.volumes`
- The directories specified by the label `napnap75.backup.dirs`
- The databases specified by the label `napnap75.backup.databases` (must be a MySQL/MariaDB database)

# Usage (installation)
## Common rules
1. Map the root directory of your host with the `/root_fs` folder in the container (this will allow the script to access the files to backup).
2. Map the Docker socket inside the container (this will allow the script to discover automatically the containers and list the things to backup).
3. Set the `RESTIC_PASSWORD` environment variable to the name of a file containing the password used by Restic to protect the repository. I advise to make this password available through Docker Swarm secrets.
4. Set the `RESTIC_REPOSITORY` environment variable to the description of the repository (see below).

## Local backup
5. Map the directory where you want to store your backups in the container.
6. Set `RESTIC_REPOSITORY` environment variable to the path (inside the container) of this directory.

## SFTP backup
5. Set the `RESTIC_REPOSITORY` environment variable to the form `sftp:%USERNAME_ON_THE_REMOTE_HOST%@%NAME_OFF_THE_REMOTE_HOST%:%DIRECTORY_WHERE_TO_BACKUP_ON_THE_REMOTE_HOST%`.
6. Set the `SFTP_HOST` environment variable to the name of the remote host.
7. Set the `SFTP_KEY` environment variable to the name of a file containing the SSH key that will be used to connect to the remote host. I advise to make this key available through Docker Swarm secrets.
8. If it's not 22, set the `SFTP_PORT` environment variable to the SSH port number on the remote host.

## S3 backup
5. Set the `RESTIC_REPOSITORY` environment variable to the form `s3:%URL_OF_YOUR_S3_BUCKET%`.
6. Set the `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` variables to your access and secret key (these values could be the name of a file on the disk containing the secret, especially to use with Docker Swarm secrets).

# Usage (telling what to backup)
On your other containers (because the Docker socket is mounted on the backup container, the script will be able to read it directly), add the following labels to tell what to backup :
- `napnap75.backup.dirs=%DIRECTORY_ON_THE_HOST%, %ANOTHER_DIRECTORY%` to backup directories from the Docker host
- `napnap75.backup.volumes=%VOLUME_NAME%, %ANOTHER_VOLUME%` to backup Docker volumes
- `napnap75.backup.databases=%DATABASE_NAME%, %ANOTHER_DATABASE%` to backup MySQL/MariaDB databases (the environment variable MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD must be set with the root password on localhost or the root user must have no password on localhost)

# Usage (additional functionnalities)
- The script is able to post a message to a Slack webhook when a backup is finished or failed. Add the `SLACK_URL` environment variable with the URL of your Slack webhook.
- The script is able to store the results of the backup to a InfluxDB database. Add the `INFLUXDB_URL` environment variable with the URL of your database.

# Usage (troubleshooting / managing backups)
If you want to troubleshoot or manage your backups, run `docker exec -it %NAME_OF_YOUR_CONTAINER% bash` with a running container and use the `restic` command (see https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/stable/manual.html) :
- In case of a problem with the repository use `restic check`, `restic prune` or `restic rebuild-index`.
- To reduce the size of the repository use `restic forget --prune`.
- To restore some backup use `restic restore`.


# Examples
## Backup a directory, a volume or a database to a local repo (docker run on a single host)
1. Run the backup script container : `docker run -v /home/backup:/restic_repo -e "RESTIC_REPOSITORY=/restic_repo" -v /home/backup/password:/restic_pass -e "RESTIC_PASSWORD=/restic_pass" -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro -v /:/root_fs:ro napnap75/rpi-docker-backup:latest`
2. Run a Transmission container and tell the backup script to backup its home directory : `docker run -v /home/transmission:/home -v /home/media:/media --label "napnap75.backup.dirs=/home/transmission" napnap75/rpi-transmission:latest`
3. Same with a volume : `docker run -v transmission_home:/home -v /home/media:/media --label "napnap75.backup.volumes=transmission_home" napnap75/rpi-transmission:latest`
4. Run a MariaDB container and tell the backup script to backup the mysql database : `docker run -e "MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=my-secret-pw" --label "napnap75.backup.databases=mysql" -d mariadb`

## Backup a volume to a sftp repo (docker stack on a swarm)
This stack file will run one backup instance on each node of the swarm and backup the configuration volume of the portainer container.
```
version: "3.1"
services :
  portainer:
    image: portainer/portainer:linux-arm
    ports:
      - 9000:9000
    volumes:
      - portainer_data:/data
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
    labels:
      - "napnap75.backup.volumes=portainer_data"
    deploy:
      placement:
        constraints: [node.role == manager]
  docker-backup:
    image: napnap75/rpi-docker-backup:latest
    volumes:
      - /:/root_fs:ro
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro
    environment:
      - SFTP_HOST=myhost.com
      - SFTP_PORT=22
      - SFTP_KEY=/run/secrets/private.key
      - RESTIC_PASSWORD=/run/secrets/restic.password
      - RESTIC_REPOSITORY=sftp:myuser@myhost.com:restic
      - SLACK_URL=https://hooks.slack.com/services/ABCDE/FGHIJ/KLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
      - INFLUXDB_URL=http://192.168.1.1:8086/write?db=supervision
    secrets:
      - private.key
      - restic.password
    deploy:
      mode: global
secrets:
  private.key:
    external: true
  restic.password:
    external: true
volumes:
  portainer_data:
```

Commit message:

Control stopping and starting container through container label, documented in READM Use socket instead of hardcoded IP adress for stopping and starting containers

README.md, after:

# Status
[![Github link](https://assets-cdn.github.com/favicon.ico)](https://github.com/napnap75/rpi-docker-backup)
[![Travis ling](https://cdn.travis-ci.org/images/favicon-076a22660830dc325cc8ed70e7146a59.png)](https://travis-ci.org/napnap75/rpi-docker-backup)
[![Docker hub link](https://www.docker.com/favicon.ico)](https://hub.docker.com/r/napnap75/rpi-docker-backup/)

# Content
This image is based [my own Alpine Linux base image](https://hub.docker.com/r/napnap75/rpi-alpine-base/).

This image contains :
- [Restic](https://restic.github.io/).

This image runs a backup every night (between midnight and 7 AM) on all the containers running on the host. For each container, the script will backup the followin parts (depending of the container labels) :
- The volumes specified by the label `napnap75.backup.volumes`
- The directories specified by the label `napnap75.backup.dirs`
- The databases specified by the label `napnap75.backup.databases` (must be a MySQL/MariaDB database)

# Usage (installation)
## Common rules
1. Map the root directory of your host with the `/root_fs` folder in the container (this will allow the script to access the files to backup).
2. Map the Docker socket inside the container (this will allow the script to discover automatically the containers and list the things to backup).
3. Set the `RESTIC_PASSWORD` environment variable to the name of a file containing the password used by Restic to protect the repository. I advise to make this password available through Docker Swarm secrets.
4. Set the `RESTIC_REPOSITORY` environment variable to the description of the repository (see below).

## Local backup
5. Map the directory where you want to store your backups in the container.
6. Set `RESTIC_REPOSITORY` environment variable to the path (inside the container) of this directory.

## SFTP backup
5. Set the `RESTIC_REPOSITORY` environment variable to the form `sftp:%USERNAME_ON_THE_REMOTE_HOST%@%NAME_OFF_THE_REMOTE_HOST%:%DIRECTORY_WHERE_TO_BACKUP_ON_THE_REMOTE_HOST%`.
6. Set the `SFTP_HOST` environment variable to the name of the remote host.
7. Set the `SFTP_KEY` environment variable to the name of a file containing the SSH key that will be used to connect to the remote host. I advise to make this key available through Docker Swarm secrets.
8. If it's not 22, set the `SFTP_PORT` environment variable to the SSH port number on the remote host.

## S3 backup
5. Set the `RESTIC_REPOSITORY` environment variable to the form `s3:%URL_OF_YOUR_S3_BUCKET%`.
6. Set the `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` variables to your access and secret key (these values could be the name of a file on the disk containing the secret, especially to use with Docker Swarm secrets).

# Usage (telling what to backup)
On your other containers (because the Docker socket is mounted on the backup container, the script will be able to read it directly), add the following labels to tell what to backup :
- `napnap75.backup.dirs=%DIRECTORY_ON_THE_HOST%, %ANOTHER_DIRECTORY%` to backup directories from the Docker host
- `napnap75.backup.volumes=%VOLUME_NAME%, %ANOTHER_VOLUME%` to backup Docker volumes
- `napnap75.backup.databases=%DATABASE_NAME%, %ANOTHER_DATABASE%` to backup MySQL/MariaDB databases (the environment variable MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD must be set with the root password on localhost or the root user must have no password on localhost)

# Usage (additional functionnalities)
- If the script shall stop the container during backup, add the label `napnap75.backup.stopstart` to the container. Otherwise it will remain running during backup, in case of
  modifications during the backup it may be unusable.
- The script is able to post a message to a Slack webhook when a backup is finished or failed. Add the `SLACK_URL` environment variable with the URL of your Slack webhook.
- The script is able to store the results of the backup to a InfluxDB database. Add the `INFLUXDB_URL` environment variable with the URL of your database.

# Usage (troubleshooting / managing backups)
If you want to troubleshoot or manage your backups, run `docker exec -it %NAME_OF_YOUR_CONTAINER% bash` with a running container and use the `restic` command (see https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/stable/manual.html) :
- In case of a problem with the repository use `restic check`, `restic prune` or `restic rebuild-index`.
- To reduce the size of the repository use `restic forget --prune`.
- To restore some backup use `restic restore`.


# Examples
## Backup a directory, a volume or a database to a local repo (docker run on a single host)
1. Run the backup script container : `docker run -v /home/backup:/restic_repo -e "RESTIC_REPOSITORY=/restic_repo" -v /home/backup/password:/restic_pass -e "RESTIC_PASSWORD=/restic_pass" -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro -v /:/root_fs:ro napnap75/rpi-docker-backup:latest`
2. Run a Transmission container and tell the backup script to backup its home directory : `docker run -v /home/transmission:/home -v /home/media:/media --label "napnap75.backup.dirs=/home/transmission" napnap75/rpi-transmission:latest`
3. Same with a volume : `docker run -v transmission_home:/home -v /home/media:/media --label "napnap75.backup.volumes=transmission_home" napnap75/rpi-transmission:latest`
4. Run a MariaDB container and tell the backup script to backup the mysql database : `docker run -e "MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=my-secret-pw" --label "napnap75.backup.databases=mysql" -d mariadb`

## Backup a volume to a sftp repo (docker stack on a swarm)
This stack file will run one backup instance on each node of the swarm and backup the configuration volume of the portainer container.
```
version: "3.1"
services :
  portainer:
    image: portainer/portainer:linux-arm
    ports:
      - 9000:9000
    volumes:
      - portainer_data:/data
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
    labels:
      - "napnap75.backup.volumes=portainer_data"
    deploy:
      placement:
        constraints: [node.role == manager]
  docker-backup:
    image: napnap75/rpi-docker-backup:latest
    volumes:
      - /:/root_fs:ro
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro
    environment:
      - SFTP_HOST=myhost.com
      - SFTP_PORT=22
      - SFTP_KEY=/run/secrets/private.key
      - RESTIC_PASSWORD=/run/secrets/restic.password
      - RESTIC_REPOSITORY=sftp:myuser@myhost.com:restic
      - SLACK_URL=https://hooks.slack.com/services/ABCDE/FGHIJ/KLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
      - INFLUXDB_URL=http://192.168.1.1:8086/write?db=supervision
    secrets:
      - private.key
      - restic.password
    deploy:
      mode: global
secrets:
  private.key:
    external: true
  restic.password:
    external: true
volumes:
  portainer_data:
```
